First version of the How To Make a Good README (#79)
EVERSE-ResearchSoftware/RSQKit: pages/your_tasks/how_to_make_a_good_readme.md

---
title: How to make a good README
search_exclude: true
description: Description of good practice to make a good README for research software.
contributors: ["Esteban González"]
page_id: good_README
related_pages: []
# More information on which page id you can use can be found at https://rdmkit.elixir-europe.org/website_overview
training:
  - name:
    registry:
    url:
# More information on how to fill in this metadata section can be found here https://rdmkit.elixir-europe.org/page_metadata
---
<!-- Please take in mind our style guide https://rdmkit.elixir-europe.org/style_guide when writing the content of this page. -->

## Why is it important a good README file? <!-- example: how to version control my code? -->
 
### Description <!-- do not delete this heading and write your text below it -->

> The README file is the entry point to the documentation associated with a software. The main purpose of the README is:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The README file is the entry point to the documentation associated with a software. The main purpose of the README is to:
```

* Describe the structure of the project and its purpose.
* Facilitate the installation and execution of the software stored in the repository.

> * Detail the use of the software.

Reviewer: Point to the software's licence for the terms of reuse?

Reviewer 2: I will merge for now, and we can do another review

* Relation with other research outputs such as publications, datasets, etc. These research outputs can be in the repository or in external repositories.

### Considerations <!-- do not delete this heading and write your text below it -->
* A good README favors the use of your software[^1].
* A good README increments the transparency of your research.
* A good README will help you to mantain the software during the software lifecycle.
 

## Which sections should be addressed in a good README? <!-- example: how to name a software release? -->
 
### Description <!-- do not delete this heading and write your text below it -->
A README file is the first document that a researchers read when they are interested on using a software. For this reason, should contain all the relevant information to install and to execute it. It includes references to additional information such as API documentation, specifications, scientific publications related, tutorials, guidelines, etc.

A basic software documentation emphasizes these aspects[^2] :
* Understandability: a user can comprehend the structure and the purpose of the software.

> * Usability: a user can understant how to use the software.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Usability: a user can understand how to use the software.
```

> * Attribution: how a user must cite the software.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Attribution: how a user should cite the software.
```

These aspects should be addressed in different sections of the README. 

### Considerations <!-- do not delete this heading and write your text below it -->
* A good README should describe the purpose and the features of the software.
* A good README should describe how to execute and to use the code. 

> * In a research context, a good README should indicate how the software must be cited.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* In a research context, a good README should indicate how the software should be cited.
```

* In a research context, a good README should indicate the funding agency and the proper acknowledgements.

> * In the context of scientific experiments, a good README should facilitate its reproducibility.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* In the context of a scientific experiment, a good README should facilitate its reproducibility.
```

### Solutions <!-- do not delete this heading and write your text below it -->

The following sections can be included in the README to facilitate the use of the software and to allow its citation.

**Description**

In this section, you will have to describe the purpose and the features of your software.

**Requirements**

In this section, you can include the requirements needed to install and to execute the software. These requirements can be software (e.g. operative system) or hardware (e.g. CPU, memory, etc.). There is no need to include low level requirements like language library dependencies. These requirements must be provided with the appropriate mechanism of each language. For example, in Python by using the requirements.txt file. 

This is a non exhaustive list of requirements categories that you can consider:

> Operative System version

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Operating system version
```

> Operative System libraries version

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Operating system libraries version
```

Reviewer: Not sure what is meant by "Operating system libraries version" - is it the dependencies of the software?

Reviewer 2: I understand this ad the packages installed in the operating system itself. For example, you must have cmake, you  must have a separate visualization software, etc.

Version of the interpreter (e.g. Python 3.9, Java 7, etc.)
Additional software needed to execute the software. For example, a database, a workflow engine, etc.
Infrastructure requirements (e.g. number of CPUs, memory, disk, etc.)  

**Installation process**

In this section, you can describe the installation steps needed to install the software. You have to assume that the user has no knowledge about operative systems or programming languages, so you need to be exhaustive. It is important to reflect all the commands that must be executed by the user.

In case you need to install additional software, like a Java Virtual Machine or a database, you will have to add a link to additional information that describes how to install it. 

If you have multiple options for installing the software (e.g. installing a library, docker, script) you should describe them.

**Configuration**

Sometimes, software needs to be configured to be executed. Usually, this task is done by filling in a configuration file. You will need to add this information to the README. In case you have documentation that describes the fields of the configuration file, you can also add it to the README.

**Usage**

> In this section, you will include all the steps needed to use the application. For example, if it is a command line tool, you will need to describe all the parameters. As we mentioned in the installation section, you have to assume no skills in the user, so you will need to be exhaustive.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this section, you should include all the steps needed to use the application. For example, if it is a command line tool, you will need to describe all the parameters. As we mentioned in the installation section, you have to assume no skills in the user, so you will need to be exhaustive.
```

It is recommended to add examples of the application usage in order to illustrate users in the software management. This information can be complemented with links to tutorials in different formats (e.g. video, PDF, notebooks, etc.)  

Research software can be developed to execute experiments whose results are shown in a scientific publication. For this reason, and to add transparency to the research, it is important to show how the results can be achieved. You can use this section to describe the process to get the results. 

**Contribution**

Research software should be a collaborative effort, so a mechanism to allow other researchers to collaborate with the project is needed. In this section, you can describe how this mechanism is. For example, if you want to add a new feature, you can create a pull request to integrate this new feature.

**Acknowledgement**

> Funders of the research software must be mentioned in the README. There will be a high variety of funders, from public/private institutions to national/international governments. You will have to include all of them. Check the acknowledgement policy of each institution to do it properly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All funders of the research software should be mentioned in the README - check the acknowledgement policy of each institution for how best to do it.
```
